THESE PROTESTERS BELIEVE
THEY ARE THE DEFENDERS
OF DEMOCRACY AND FREEDOM.
OVER THE PAST DECADE,
MILLIONS HAVE JOINED
THE ANTI-GLOBALIZATION
MOVEMENT TO PREVENT
THE SPREAD OF
GLOBAL CAPITALISM.
WE ALL WANT A BETTER WORLD,
FREE FROM POVERTY AND INJUSTICE.
BUT GOOD INTENTIONS DON'T MAKE
THE WORLD A BETTER PLACE.
IN THIS FILM, I'M GOING
TO EXPLAIN WHY I BELIEVE
THAT THE
ANTI-GLOBALIZATION MOVEMENT
IS IGNORANT
AND DANGEROUSLY WRONG.
THE PROTESTERS CLAIM THAT
GLOBALIZATION CREATES POVERTY.
THEY ARE WRONG.
ALL COUNTRIES USED TO BE POOR.
IT'S ONLY IN THIS NEW ERA
OF MODERNIZATION
THAT COUNTRIES HAVE STARTED
TO ESCAPE DESTITUTION.
IN THE PAST 50 YEARS, 3 BILLION
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN LIFTED OUT
OF POVERTY -
THIS IS HISTORICALLY UNIQUE.
FAR FROM MAKING THE WORLD
A POORER AND MORE UNFAIR PLACE,
MY RESEARCH AS A WRITER
HAS CONVINCED ME THAT GLOBAL
CAPITALISM COULD MAKE THE
WHOLE WORLD AS WEALTHY AND FREE
AS EUROPE IS TODAY -
IF ONLY WE LET IT.
IN FACT, POVERTY IS ON
THE WAY OUT IN THOSE COUNTRIES
THAT HAVE INTEGRATED
INTO THE GLOBAL ECONOMY.
150 YEARS AGO, MY COUNTRY,
SWEDEN, WAS POORER
THAN MOST AFRICAN COUNTRIES
ARE TODAY AND THIS BAY WAS
LITTLE MORE THAN A DUMP
FOR STOCKHOLM'S EXCREMENT
AND GARBAGE.
BUT WE EMBRACED GLOBALIZATION -
BY WHICH I MEAN A FREE MARKET
ECONOMY BASED ON THE RIGHT
TO START A BUSINESS
AND TRADE WITHOUT RESTRICTION.
AND JUST LOOK
AT OUR WEALTH TODAY.
I'M SETTING OUT ON A
JOURNEY FIRST TO TAIWAN TO SEE
HOW GLOBALIZATION LEADS
TO WEALTH AND DEMOCRACY,
SECOND TO VIETNAM TO FIND OUT
WHAT MULTI-NATIONALS
ARE REALLY DOING TO DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES AND FINALLY TO KENYA
TO TRY AND DISCOVER WHY AFRICA
IS STILL SO DESPERATELY POOR.
FAR FROM BEING
A THREAT TO MANKIND,
I'M GOING TO SHOW THAT
GLOBAL CAPITALISM IS ITS SAVIOR.
TAIPEI, CAPITAL OF TAIWAN.
JUST 30 YEARS AGO THIS TINY
EAST ASIAN COUNTRY,
WAS POORER
THAN MANY AFRICANS TODAY.
MALNUTRITION WAS WIDESPREAD AND
THERE WERE NO NATURAL RESOURCES.
TODAY, ITS PEOPLE
ARE AS RICH AS THE SPANISH.
EVIDENCE OF TAIWAN'S WEALTH
IS EVERYWHERE AND RISING.
IN JUST TEN YEARS SINCE
THEY BEGAN MODERNIZING,
TAIWANESE POVERTY RATES
WERE CUT BY MORE THAN HALF.
TODAY, ABSOLUTE POVERTY
IS VIRTUALLY NON-EXISTENT HERE
AND REAL WAGES ARE
TEN TIMES HIGHER
THAN THEY WERE 40 YEARS AGO.
THIS MIRACLE ONLY HAPPENED
BECAUSE THE COUNTRY CONSCIOUSLY
EMBRACED GLOBAL CAPITALISM.
BUT BEFORE A COUNTRY
CAN DO THAT,
IT MUST HAVE
CAPITALISM AT HOME.
AND THE FIRST STEP
TOWARDS THAT IS LAND REFORM.
IF PEOPLE DON'T OWN THEIR LAND,
THEY HAVE NO INCENTIVE
TO MAKE IT PROFITABLE.
IN THE 1950'S THE TAIWANESE
GOVERNMENT BEGAN BUYING LAND
FROM THE OLD ELITE AND
GIVING IT TO THE POPULATION.
YIELDS INCREASED RAPIDLY AND
TAIWAN WAS SUPPLIED WITH FOOD,
RELEASING MANPOWER FOR INDUSTRY.
ONCE THIS WAS A FARMHOUSE
SURROUNDED BY RICE PADDIES.
IT'S WHERE MR. WANG ONCE
LIVED AND HE STILL COMES HERE
TO PLAY MAH JONG
WITH HIS FRIENDS.
MR. WANG ILLUSTRATES HOW TAIWAN
BENEFITED FROM LAND REFORM.
HIS PARENTS WERE POOR FARMERS
UNTIL THE GOVERNMENT GAVE THEM
THEIR LAND IN 1968.
ONCE HE OWNED THE LAND
MR. WANG'S FATHER
THOUGHT IT WORTHWHILE
TO BUILD A MILL.
TODAY, MR. WANG
IS A MILLIONAIRE.
HE TURNED HIS FATHER'S MILL
INTO A FACTORY,
MAKING THOSE CHEAP PLASTIC TOYS
FOR WHICH TAIWAN BECAME KNOWN
IN THE SIXTIES.
HIS JOURNEY FROM
RURAL BEGINNINGS
TO INDUSTRIAL WEALTH REFLECTS
HOW TAIWAN HAS DEVELOPED.
AT A NEARBY TEAHOUSE, I ASKED
MR. WANG HOW IT ALL BEGAN.
MR. WANG:
TOYS, SUCH AS BARBIE DOLLS,
CHILDREN'S BUILDING BRICKS,
SPORTS GEAR LIKE
SKATEBOARDS, STAINLESS
STEEL SCISSORS
WITH PLAIC HANDLES.
AT THE BEGINNING WE WERE WORKING
24 HOURS A DAY IN SHIFTS.
THE MACHINERY IN
THE PAST WAS MORE LIKELY
TO CAUSE ACCIDENTS.
YOU HAD TO
LEARN AND ABSORB SLOWLY.
THAT'S WHAT CAUSED
THE INJURIES TO MY FINGERS
BECAUSE I DIDN'T KNOW BETTER.
NARRATOR: THESE EARLY FACTORIES
WERE SWEATSHOPS, BUT BACK THEN
ALL TAIWAN HAD TO OFFER
WAS CHEAP LABOR AND LONG HOURS.
MR. WANG TOLD ME HOW
THE GOVERNMENT'S PUSH
FOR INDUSTRIALIZATION DURING
THE SIXTIES MEANT HIS PARENTS
WERE ENCOURAGED
TO BUILD THEIR FACTORY.
AT THAT TIME, THE THEN VICE
PRESIDENT WAS ENCOURAGING PEOPLE
TO GO INTO THE MANUFACTURING
INDUSTRY BY TELLING US,
"YOUR HOME IS A FACTORY" AND
"THE LIVING ROOM IS A FACTORY".
ORIGINALLY,
WE WERE GROWING CROPS.
THE FIELD WE WERE CULTIVATING
WAS GIVEN TO MY FATHER
BY THE GOVERNMENT.
THE GOVERNMENT
WAS REFORMING AT THE TIME.
THEY WANTED TO ENCOURAGE
SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES.
THE GOVERNMENT DECIDED WHICH
LAND WAS FOR INDUSTRIAL USE
WHICH MEANT YOU COULD BUILD
A FACTORY THERE.
MY FATHER WAS GIVEN THIS
OPPORTUNITY AND SO, OF COURSE,
WE MADE USE OF THE LAND
AND NOW OUR CHILDREN ARE
GROWN-UP AND DOING THE SAME.
NARRATOR: MR. WANG'S GENERATION
GAVE TAIWAN SWEATSHOPS
CHURNING OUT CHEAP GOODS
FOR WESTERN MARKETS.
UGLY BLIGHTS ON THE LANDSCAPE,
YES, BUT DON'T OPPOSE THEM.
THEY WERE A TRANSITORY
BUT CRUCIAL STAGE
ON TAIWAN'S ROAD TO RICHES.
IF THE ANTI-GLOBALIZERS
HAD BEEN AROUND
WHEN TAIWAN WAS INDUSTRIALIZED,
THEY WOULD HAVE PROTESTED
AGAINST THE
FACTORIES AND TOLD US
WE WERE EXPLOITING
CHEAP LABOR.
SURELY THEY WOULD
HAVE ORGANIZED A BOYCOTT.
AND PERHAPS YOU WOULD
HAVE DECIDED NOT TO BUY THINGS
MADE IN TAIWAN.
IF ENOUGH OF YOU
HAD DECIDED THAT
TAIWAN WOULD STILL
BE POOR TODAY.
NARRATOR: AS MR. WANG AND HIS
GENERATION BECAME SUCCESSFUL,
MORE AND MORE FACTORIES
SPRUNG UP WHICH MEANT
THERE WAS AN INCREASING
DEMAND FOR LABOR.
ONCE INDUSTRIALIZATION
WAS WELL UNDERWAY,
COMPETITION FOR LABOR
MADE WAGES RISE,
SO ONLY REALLY COMPETITIVE
COMPANIES COULD SURVIVE.
COMPANIES LIKE ACER FLOURISHED
BY RESPONDING TO
COMPETITION WITH INNOVATION.
STAN SHIH, ACER'S CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, IS KNOWN
FOR INVENTING TAIWAN'S
FIRST DESKTOP CALCULATOR
AND THE WORLD'S FIRST PEN WATCH.
TODAY ACER IS THE 7TH LARGEST
IT PROVIDER IN THE WORLD.
THIS IS THE FIRST MACHINE
WE EXPORTED
TO THE INTERNATIONAL MARKET
SO THIS IS 1981.
WE TRAINED ABOUT 3000
ENGINEERS IN TAIWAN BASED
ON THIS TYPE OF MACHINE.
SO I AM SO HAPPY ABOUT THAT.
THIS IS REALLY GREAT.
AND THIS IS THE FIRST COMPUTER.
AT THE END OF 83,
WE INTRODUCED
ONE OF THE FIRST COMPATIBLE
COMPUTERS IN THE REGION.
WHERE WAS THIS EXPORTED?
ALMOST EVERYWHERE.
NARRATOR: MR. SHIN
INVITED ME TO JOIN HIM
AT HIS LUNCHTIME
WORKOUT IN THE COMPANY GYM.
I WANTED TO KNOW WHAT HE THOUGHT
WAS THE KEY
TO TAIWAN'S SUCCESS.
WAS IT EASIER TO START
A BUSINESS IN TAIWAN
THAN IN OTHER COUNTRIES?
YES, I THINK SO.
PEOPLE LIKE TO OWN THEIR
OWN BUSINESS, SO WE HAVE A JOKE
IN TAIPEI CITY THAT FOR
EVERY SIX PEOPLE ON THE STREET,
THERE IS ONE CHAIRMAN.
BUT ONE IN SIX PERSONS YOU MEET
ON THE STREETS HAVE A COMPANY.
IS THERE LESS BUREAUCRACY
AND RESTRICTIONS
THAN IN OTHER COUNTRIES?
I THINK SO.
THE GOVERNMENT REGULATION IS
REASONABLE AND EVEN MANY PEOPLE
START A BUSINESS WITHOUT
KNOWING ALL THE REGULATIONS.
NARRATOR: A DEREGULATED ECONOMY
PROVIDES THE IDEAL CIRCUMSTANCES
IN WHICH ACER CONTINUES
TO THRIVE AND INNOVATE,
CONSTANTLY IMPROVING
PEOPLE'S LIVING STANDARDS.
WHAT WILL BE THE PRODUCTS OF THE
FUTURE THAT YOU WILL PRODUCE?
WE RECOGNIZE TODAY
WE HAVE A LOT OF TECHNOLOGY,
BUT HOW TO DO MORE APPLICATION
TO PACKAGE IN A WAY IS EASIER
TO SERVE THE MORE POPULATION
I THINK IS OUR MISSION.
AND MAKE IT LIKE OXYGEN.
OK, YOU DON'T FEEL IT, BUT IT'S
SO IMPORTANT TO OUR DAILY LIFE.
NARRATOR: ACROSS TAIWAN,
FAMILIES REFLECT
THE COUNTRY'S PROGRESSION.
GRANDPARENTS WERE
RURAL FARMERS, PARENTS,
FACTORY WORKERS AND
TODAY'S GENERATION,
WELL-PAID SOFTWARE ENGINEERS
AND BUSINESSMEN.
FUH-JYI CHANG WORKS IN IT
IN THE CAPITAL
AND HAS A TASTE
FOR EXPENSIVE CARS.
YET LIKE SO MANY
OF HIS GENERATION,
HIS ROOTS ARE FAR
FROM THE CITY.
TOGETHER WE DROVE TO TAI CHUNG,
THE TOWN WHERE HE GREW UP.
MY FATHER WAS A FACTORY WORKER.
HE WORKED MUCH HARDER THAN
US AND WAS EXHAUSTED EVERY DAY.
HE SWEATED WHILE WORKING
AND WAS ALWAYS REALLY TIRED.
THIS IS BECAUSE OUR EDUCATION
LEVELS ARE DIFFERENT.
MY BROTHER AND
I HAD HIGHER EDUCATION
AND I FINISHED
A MASTER'S DEGREE.
OUR WORK IS
MAINLY OFFICE-BOUND,
SO OUR JOBS
ARE REALLY DIFFERENT
AS ONE IS BASED ON LABOR
AND THE OTHER ON INTELLECT.
WE USED TO BE VERY POOR
BUT NOW WE ARE MIDDLE-CLASS,
COMFORTABLY OFF.
MOST OF MY GENERATION NOW WORKS
IN THE HIGH TECH INDUSTRY.
YOU SEE TAIWAN CHANGE
IN THE LAST 20 TO 30 YEARS.
NARRATOR: FUH-JYI'S MOTHER
STILL WORKS IN A FACTORY.
BUT FOR HER GENERATION THIS
WAS A STEP UP FROM FARMING AND
MEANT PARENTS COULD AFFORD TO
EDUCATE THEIR CHILDREN PROPERLY.
RISING PROSPERITY ALSO INCREASES
THE RETURNS ON THEIR EDUCATION.
MY PARENTS WERE FARMERS.
BACK THEN, I REALLY,
REALLY WANTED TO BE EDUCATED,
BUT WHEN I FINISHED PRIMARY
SCHOOL, MY PARENTS TOLD ME
THAT I WAS THE ELDEST SO HAD TO
EARN EXTRA MONEY FOR THE FAMILY.
I USED TO MAKE SHOES.
I HAD TO EARN THE MONEY
BECAUSE I HAD TWO KIDS.
FUH-JYI AND HIS YOUNGER
BROTHER NEEDED TO BE EDUCATED.
I AM VERY HAPPY WITH WHAT
HE HAS ACHIEVED SO FAR.
HE IS A GOOD MAN
ALWAYS STRIVING TO GET AHEAD.
HE IS VERY GOOD TO ME.
HOW CAN I PUT THIS?
WELL, HE GOT MARRIED RECENTLY
AND I WENT TO TAIPEI CITY.
HIS GENERAL MANAGER AND
THE DEPUTY GENERAL MANAGER
TOLD ME THAT MY SON
WAS BRILLIANT.
I WAS SO HAPPY TO HEAR IT
THAT I CRIED.
THE PREVIOUS GENERATION
MADE PAPER BOXES.
THE CURRENT ONE PRODUCES
THE GOODS THAT GO IN THEM.
NARRATOR: IN CONTRAST
TO AFRICAN COUNTRIES
THAT TRIED TO BE SELF-SUFFICIENT
AND PRODUCE EVERYTHING
THEY NEEDED AT HOME,
TAIWAN SPECIALIZED IN
THOSE SECTORS WHERE THEY COULD
PRODUCE WELL AND IMPORTED
THE REST.
BECAUSE THEY WERE CONSTANTLY
EXPOSED TO FOREIGN COMPETITION,
COMPANIES HAD TO BE MORE
PRODUCTIVE AND INNOVATIVE
IN ORDER TO SURVIVE AND GROW.
FROM BICYCLES AND TOYS
TO CD'S AND COMPUTERS
IN ONE GENERATION,
I THINK THAT SUMS UP TAIWAN'S
JOURNEY FROM RAGS TO RICHES.
NARRATOR: GLOBALIZATION
MAKES A COUNTRY WEALTHY
AND IT'S THIS WEALTH WHICH
BREEDS A MIDDLE CLASS
WITH A VESTED INTEREST IN
ECONOMIC FREEDOM AN DEMOCRACY.
I BELIEVE DEMOCRACY IS
ANOTHER HAPPY SIDE-EFFECT
OF GLOBALIZATION.
TODAY, TAIWAN
IS A DEMOCRACY LIKE BRITAIN.
JUST 40 YEARS AGO,
TAIWAN WAS A DICTATORSHIP
UNDER THE IRON RULE
OF CHANG KAI SHEK.
I VISITED HIS MEMORIAL
WITH JOHN WANG,
WRITER AT LARGE
FOR A BUSINESS MAGAZINE
AND A POLITICAL ACTIVIST
WHO HAD TAKEN PART
IN THE PRO-DEMOCRACY
DEMONSTRATIONS RIGHT HERE.
AFTER PRESIDENT CHAING
KAI SHECK DIED IN 1975,
I THINK TAIWAN BEGAN
TO GO THROUGH A TRANSFORMATION.
BECAUSE IN THE PAST,
IN THE 60'S AND 70'S,
TAIWAN RELIED VERY HEAVILY ON
THIS LABOR-INTENSIVE INDUSTRY,
SO IN THE 80'S WE STARTED
TO MAKE COMPUTER PARTS,
REFRIGERATORS, AIR CONDITIONERS,
TV SETS, THINGS LIKE THAT...
MORE HIGH VALUE ADDED.
THE IDEA OF MIDDLE CLASS STARTED
TO BECOME REALITY IN THE 80'S.
SO TOGETHER WITH
THE POLITICAL MOVEMENT
AND I THINK THE MIDDLE
CLASS WANT TO HAVE MORE FREEDOM
WHETHER IN
THEIR POLITICAL RIGHTS
OR IN THEIR ECONOMIC RIGHTS.
SO WOULD YOU SAY THAT
GLOBALIZATION AND ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT PLAYED A DECISIVE
ROLE IN THE SHIFT TO DEMOCRACY?
YES, DEFINITELY.
NARRATOR: GLOBALIZATION
AND THE ECONOMIC GROWTH
THAT SPRINGS
FROM IT ARE THE ROCKS
ON WHICH DEMOCRACIES
ARE FOUNDED.
IT'S NO COINCIDENCE THAT THE
RICHEST COUNTRIES IN THE WORLD
LIKE AMERICA
AND EUROPEAN NATIONS
ARE THE MOST STABLE DEMOCRACIES.
CRITICS OF GLOBALIZATION
CLAIM THAT THIS PROCESS
OF DEMOCRATIZATION
IS REALLY AMERICANIZATION.
BUT IF PEOPLE IN OTHER
CULTURES WANT TO DRINK STARBUCKS
OR EAT AT MCDONALD'S,
WHY SHOULDN'T THEY?
TOO OFTEN WE WANT CULTURES
TO REMAIN FROZEN AND INTACT
SO WE CAN TREAT THEIR
COUNTRIES LIKE EXOTIC MUSEUMS
WHICH WE VISIT FOR PLEASURE.
BUT SHOULDN'T THEY HAVE
THE SAME RIGHTS AS WE DO?
BESIDES, IT'S NOT
AS IF MCDONALD'S
IS EVER THE ONLY CHOICE.
TAIWAN GOT RICH BY REWARDING
THOSE WHO USED THE BEST IDEAS
AND TECHNOLOGIES FROM ALL AROUND
THE WORLD AND THEY STILL DO.
JUST LOOK AT THIS PLACE,
CHA FOR TEA.
THEY BORROW THE LATEST
STARBUCKS CONCEPTS TO MAKE
THEIR OWN NATIONAL TEA
TRADITIONS POPULAR AND TRENDY
AND THEY ARE EXPANDING
WITH NEW TEA ROOMS
OPENING IN THE US AND JAPAN.
NARRATOR: GLOBALIZATION BRINGS
WEALTH AND FREEDOM TO EVERYONE,
BUT THE ANTI-GLOBALIZATION
MOVEMENT CLAIMS
THAT IT'S ONLY THE DANGEROUSLY
POWERFUL MULTI-NATIONALS
REAPING THE REWARDS.
*IF YOU WANT TO HEAR
ABOUT SPORTING GEAR,*
*THEN DON'T BUY NIKE!
*NIKE ALWAYS WANTS TO TAKE
ALL THE PROFITS IT CAN MAKE.*
*SHAME!
NIKE'S RIPPING OFF ITS WORKERS.*
A COMPANY LIKE NIKE
IS OFTEN BRANDED
THE ENEMY OF DEMOCRACY
AND LIBERTY.
BUT IT IS IN FACT A
HUGE CONTRIBUTOR TO FREEDOM.
NARRATOR: NEXT,
I'M GOING TO VIETNAM
TO FIND OUT IF NIKE
DOES DO THE RIGHT THING.
NARRATOR: VIETNAM, ONE
OF THE WORLD'S POOREST NATIONS.
THE VAST MAJORITY
OF THE POPULATION STILL
LIVES OFF THE LAND.
BUT THAT'S CHANGING.
AND IT'S CHANGING
BECAUSE THE COUNTRY IS FULL
OF THOSE SWEATSHOPS
THAT THE ANTI-GLOBALIZERS
ARE SO KEEN TO BOYCOTT.
WE'VE COME TO THE CAPITAL,
HO-CHI-MINH CITY, ONCE SAIGON.
AND WE ARE ON OUR WAY
TO VISIT THE FLAGSHIP FACTORY
OF PERHAPS THE MOST NOTORIOUS
OF THOSE MULTI-NATIONALS.
SAY NIKE TO ANY ANTI-GLOBALIZER
AND THEY'LL SAY "SWEATSHOP".
OF COURSE, I WOULDN'T
WANT TO WORK IN ONE.
BUT I'VE NEVER SAID THAT
GLOBALIZATION IS A SMOOTH RIDE.
WHAT GLOBALIZATION DOES
IS PRODUCE LONG-TERM BENEFITS
WHICH THE PROTESTERS
KEEP IGNORING.
NARRATOR: AND
IT'S THESE SWEATSHOPS
WHICH ARE THE STEPPING-STONES
TO PROGRESS.
SWEDEN TOO HAD ITS FAIR SHARE
OF THEM, AS DID TAIWAN.
THEY'RE A NECESSARY STAGE IN
ANY COUNTRY'S INDUSTRIALIZATION.
THE FACTORY'S GENERAL
MANAGER, LALIT MONTEIRO,
SHOWED ME AROUND.
WHAT MANY PROTESTERS FORGET
IS MULTI-NATIONAL COMPANIES
ARE MADE UP OF PEOPLE.
AND PEOPLE TAKE PRIDE
IN WORKING FOR A COMPANY
AND THEY WANT TO DO
THE RIGHT THING.
ONE OF THE NIKE'S MAXIMS IS,
"DO THE RIGHT THING",
AND OUR EMPLOYEES TAKE THAT
VERY SERIOUSLY.
SO WHEN PEOPLE PROTEST
THE BRAND,
WE FEEL THAT THERE'S
A RESPONSIBILITY,
NOT ONLY FROM AN ETHICAL
STANDPOINT TO INVESTIGATE
WHETHER THERE'S TRUTH BEHIND
THE ALLEGATIONS BUT ALSO,
BECAUSE OUR BRAND
IS ONE OF OUR GREATEST ASSETS.
FOR EXAMPLE, NIKE AS A RULE
DOES NOT EMPLOY ANY WORKERS
IN ANY OF OUR CONTRACT
FACTORIES UNDER THE AGE OF 18
FOR FOOTWEAR AND 16 FOR APPAREL.
NARRATOR: VIETNAM OUTLAWED
CHILD LABOR IN 1988,
BUT THE ECONOMY WAS STILL WEAK
AND PARENTS RELIED
ON THEIR CHILDREN WORKING
IN ORDER TO SURVIVE.
BUT, NOW, THE NUMBER
OF VIETNAMESE CHILDREN IN WORK
HAS DROPPED BY 2.2 MILLION
IN JUST TEN YEARS.
PEOPLE CAN NOW AFFORD EDUCATION
AND MORE VIETNAMESE CHILDREN
ARE IN SCHOOL THAN EVER BEFORE.
THE IDEA OF MULTI-NATIONALS
HIRING HORDES OF CHILDREN
TO SLAVE IN THEIR SWEATSHOPS
IS AN OUTDATED MYTH.
THERE'S NO INCENTIVE FOR
A FOREIGN-INVESTED COMPANY
TO HIRE CHILD LABOR.
FIRST OF ALL, IT'S NOT THE
RIGHT THING, BUT SECOND OF ALL,
IF A WORKER IS FOUND TO HAVE
A FAKE ID, SNUCK INTO A FACTORY,
WE REQUIRE THE FACTORY TO PAY
FOR THE WORKER
TO COMPLETE SCHOOL
AND TO CONTINUE
PAYING THEM THEIR WAGE.
THE AVERAGE AGE IN OUR
CONTRACT PARTNER FACTORIES
IS ABOUT 24 TO 25 YEARS OLD.
BUT I ASSUME THEY WORK HERE
FOR A VERY LOW PAY.
AND IS THIS A WAY OF EXPLOITING
CHEAP LABOR IN A POOR COUNTRY
AS MANY CRITICS WOULD SAY?
THE AVERAGE PAY
HERE IS $54 A MONTH,
WHICH COMPARES
TO A LOCAL MINIMUM WAGE
OF 18 OR 19 DOLLARS A MONTH
FOR A STATE-OWNED ENTERPRISE.
IN ADDITION, IF YOU COMPARE
THE WAGES TO THAT OF A DOCTOR
OR TEACHER,
THEY ARE NOT VERY FAR OFF.
FOR MANY OF THESE WORKERS,
THEY'VE COME FROM AN
AGRICULTURAL-BASED ECONOMY,
THEY HAVE A CHANCE, INSTEAD
OF WORKING, 10 OR 14 HOURS A DAY
IN A FIELD TO WORKING IN
AN ENVIRONMENT THAT'S CLEAN,
THAT'S SAFE, THAT PAYS THEM
A REGULAR WAGE.
WHERE THEY GET FREE
OR SUBSIDIZED MEALS
AND WHERE BASICALLY THERE'S
AN INVESTMENT IN THE FUTURE
OF TRAINING AND EDUCATION.
NARRATOR: BUT NIKE DOESN'T
PAY ITS WORKERS MORE,
SIMPLY BECAUSE ITS GENEROUS
BUT BECAUSE A MULTI-NATIONAL
BRINGS FOREIGN MACHINERY,
NEW MANAGEMENT IDEAS,
A BIGGER MARKET AND
EDUCATION FOR ITS WORKERS.
THESE ASSETS ARE WHAT MAKE A
MULTI-NATIONAL SO PRODUCTIVE
AND SO ABLE
TO PAY HIGHER WAGES.
IN THE CANTEEN I TALKED
TO SOME OF THE WORKERS
DURING THEIR LUNCH BREAK.
I WAS PLANNING TO GO
TO KOREA SO I HAD A BREAK.
AFTER TWO YEARS I DECIDED
TO COME BACK TO THE FACTORY
BECAUSE THE COMPANY WAS GOOD
AND PRODUCED GOOD HIGH QUALITY.
THE MANAGEMENT WAS ALSO VERY
GOOD SO I DECIDED TO STAY.
I WAS A TAXI DRIVER, BUT AFTER
A WHILE, BUSINESS WASN'T GOOD.
SO I DECIDED TO COME BACK
AND WORK HERE.
MY WIFE WORKS
IN THE CUTTING DEPARTMENT
AND HER SALARY IS HIGHER
THAN MINE.
NARRATOR: IN FACT, TSI-CHI
IS PAID THREE TIMES MORE
THAN HER HUSBAND BECAUSE
SHE'S RISEN TO MANAGEMENT LEVEL.
LATER, I VISITED HER AT HOME.
I AM THE MANAGER
OF THE CUTTING DEPARTMENT
AND MY JOB IS TO SUPERVISE
THE CUTTING IN ORDER TO MEET
OUR HIGH-QUALITY STANDARDS
IN MAKING SHOES AND I MANAGE
WORKERS AND MAKE SURE
THEY ARRIVE AT WORK ON TIME.
MY LIFE HAS REALLY CHANGED
BECAUSE I DON'T WORK
ON THE FARM ANY MORE.
SINCE I JOINED THE COMPANY,
MY LIFE HAS BECOME MUCH BETTER.
BEFORE, ON THE FARM,
PERHAPS HALF A MILLION DONG
WAS THE MOST I COULD EARN
A MONTH.
NOW I EARN ABOUT TWO AND A HALF
MILLION AND LIFE IS BETTER NOW.
THERE'S MY BEDROOM.
I'VE JUST BOUGHT THE TV.
NARRATOR: AT OVER £100 A MONTH,
TSI-CHI'S SALARY IS NOW
OVER FIVE TIMES WHAT IT WAS
AND SHE HAS USED THE EXTRA
MONEY TO BUILD AN EXTENSION.
I'M TRYING TO SAVE MONEY
TO DECORATE
AND MAKE THE PLACE PRETTIER.
I ASKED HER WHAT HOPES
SHE HAD FOR HER SON'S FUTURE.
I WANT TO BRING MY SON UP
SO HE BECOMES A DOCTOR.
NARRATOR: THE ANTI-GLOBALISTS
URGE US TO BOYCOTT NIKE.
IF ENOUGH OF YOU DO THAT,
TSI-CHI LOSES HER JOB.
WATCHING WORKERS PLAYING
SPORTS DURING THEIR LUNCH-BREAK,
IT WAS HARD TO SEE
WHAT THE ANTI-GLOBALISTS
WERE SO STRESSED OUT ABOUT.
WHEN I GO OUT INTO
THE LOCAL COMMUNITY,
I GET ASKED TWO QUESTIONS.
ONE IS, "WHEN
ARE YOU GOING TO EXPAND
SO YOU CAN PROVIDE MORE JOBS?"
AND TWO IS, "CAN YOU PROVIDE
MY RELATIVE, A FRIEND,
A JOB IN ONE OF YOUR FACTORIES?"
THERE IS A VERY HIGH DEMAND
FOR THESE JOBS IN VIETNAM
AND WHAT WE ARE SEEING NOW
IS WORKERS FROM OTHER PARTS
OF THE COUNTRY STARTING
TO MIGRATE DOWN TO THE SOUTH
LOOKING FOR JOBS LIKE THIS.
NARRATOR: I WASN'T THE
ONLY ONE TOURING THE FACTORY.
WHILE I WAS TALKING TO LALIT,
MR. KIET, THE OWNER
OF A SMALLER, LOCAL SWEATSHOP,
WAS ALSO VISITING.
DORIS BUNGAG, CUSTOMS RELATIONS
MANAGER, WAS SHOWING HIM AROUND.
THIS IS A MINI PARK.
WE CONSTRUCTED IT
FOR OUR WORKERS.
THIS IS NOT RESERVATION
FOR THE NEW EXPANSION?
NO, NO. IT'S REALLY DESIGNED
FOR OUR WORKERS TO STAY
AND RELAX DURING THEIR BREAK.
THIS IS A PART OF OUR EXPRESSING
OUR GRATITUDE TO OUR WORKERS.
ONE OF THE OTHER THINGS
WE'VE TRIED TO DO
IS REALLY OPEN UP
TO OUTSIDE VISITORS.
AND HAVE THEM MAKE UP
THEIR OWN MINDS
ABOUT WHAT WE HAVE BEEN DOING.
LAST YEAR, VIETNAM HAD OVER
A THOUSAND EXTERNAL VISITORS
TO OUR CONTRACT FACTORIES
AND THESE INCLUDED
COLLEGE STUDENTS, DIPLOMATS,
NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS,
OTHER BUSINESSES.
SO WE HAVE A WHOLE PLETHORA
OF PEOPLE COMING THROUGH
ALL OUR FACTORIES TRYING
TO UNDERSTAND WHAT WE DO,
TRYING TO LEARN FROM US
AND TRYING TO UNDERSTAND
THE CHALLENGES WE FACE
AS A GLOBAL BRAND.
SO, MR. KIET, THIS
IS OUR INNOVATION CLASS.
IT OFFERS JOB TRAINING FOR
VIETNAMESE ASSISTANT MANAGERS.
HOW LONG FOR
ONE TRAINING COURSE?
ONE TRAINING COURSE
IS THREE MONTHS.
NARRATOR: LATER
I CAUGHT UP WITH MR. KIET.
HIS FACTORY ALSO
MAKES SHOES FOR EXPORT
AND I WAS CURIOUS TO KNOW
WHAT HE'D MADE
OF HIS VISIT TO NIKE.
BEFORE I VISIT SOME FOREIGN
FACTORY, ESPECIALLY NIKE,
WE HAVE A QUESTION.
WHY THE FOREIGN FACTORY
HERE THEY WORK WELL
AND THEY CAN AFTER MUCH MORE?
AND, ANYHOW, THEY ARE BETTER
AND WHY ARE THEY BETTER THAN US?
AND AFTER I VISIT NIKE,
I KNOW THE ANSWER.
MANAGEMENT FROM
THE NIKE FACTORY,
THEY KNOW HOW TO MAKE
THE WORKER HAPPY.
AND I RECOGNIZE THAT THE
PRODUCTIVITY NOT ONLY COMES
FROM THE MACHINERY,
BUT ALSO COMES FROM
SATISFACTION FROM THE WORKER.
SO I MEAN FOR THE FUTURE
FACTORY, ONE OF THE POINTS
WE SHOULD CONCENTRATE ON
IS OUR WORKING CONDITION.
SO YOU SEE THIS LAND
IS READY FOR CONSTRUCTION.
NARRATOR: MR. KIET HAD ALREADY
BEGUN BUILDING A NEW FACTORY.
THE COMPETITION FOR LABOR THAT
DRIVES UP WAGES AND CONDITIONS
IS ALREADY STARTING HERE
IN VIETNAM.
LOCAL FACTORIES DON'T GO BUST
WHEN A MULTI-NATIONAL MOVES IN
AS THE ANTI-GLOBALISTS FEAR.
THEY IMPROVE AND GROW,
THUS STIMULATING THE ECONOMY.
AND NIKE BENEFITS
THE COMMUNITY IN OTHER WAYS.
JUST A COUPLE OF YEARS AGO,
THE ROAD OUTSIDE
THE NIKE FACTORY WAS EMPTY.
JUST LOOK AT ALL THIS
COMMERCE CLOSE TO THE FACTORY.
ALL THIS USED TO BE RICE FARMS.
NIKE ALSO GIVES MICRO-LOANS
TO LOCAL PEOPLE
WANTING TO START UP
SMALL BUSINESSES.
I WENT TO SEE THI YEN
AND HER MOTHER, CHI HAN.
WITH A NIKE LOAN THEY
HAD STARTED A BUSINESS
MAKING RICE PAPER.
IT'S NOW THRIVING.
BECAUSE OF THE PROTESTERS,
IT'S PROBABLY THE CASE,
THAT NIKE IS MORE CAREFUL
THAN MOST MULTI-NATIONALS,
BUT ON AVERAGE, AMERICAN
MULTI-NATIONALS PAY 8 TIMES MORE
THAN THE AVERAGE INCOME IN
THE LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES.
SOME CRITICS WOULD SAY THAT,
YES, PERHAPS THE PRESENCE
OF NIKE HERE AND FOREIGN
INVESTMENT CAN CREATE
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN
THE SHORT-RUN, BUT THEN WAGES
WILL INCREASE AND REACH
THE POINT THAT BUSINESS
WILL LEAVE AND
GO TO ANOTHER COUNTRY
WITH LOWER WAGES LIKE CHINA.
AND WHAT IS GOING TO HAPPEN
TO VIETNAM THEN?
I WOULD CHALLENGE THOSE CRITICS
ON A COUPLE OF POINTS.
ONE IS NIKE HAS BEEN
IN COUNTRIES LIKE THAILAND
AND INDONESIA
FOR OVER 20 YEARS.
THE WAGES IN THOSE COUNTRIES,
IN THAILAND FOR INSTANCE,
THE WAGE IS ALMOST DOUBLE
WHAT IS IN VIETNAM.
NOW WHAT HAPPENS IS, AS YOU
STAY IN THE COUNTRY LONGER
YOUR PRODUCTIVITY INCREASES.
AND YOU FIND THAT
THE WORKERS PRODUCE MORE,
EVEN AS THEIR WAGES GO UP.
WE EXPECT THE SAME
TO OCCUR IN VIETNAM.
WE EXPECT WAGES WILL GO UP.
WE ALSO EXPECT TO BE HERE
FOR A LONG TIME.
NARRATOR: ACTUALLY,
IF NIKE DOES MOVE ON
BECAUSE WAGES HAVE GONE UP,
IT'S A GREAT THING FOR VIETNAM
BECAUSE NIKE WILL HAVE PLAYED
ITS PART IN DEVELOPING
THE VIETNAMESE ECONOMY.
THE ANTI-GLOBALISTS HAVE SCARY
VISIONS OF VAST MULTI-NATIONALS
RULING THE WORLD REGARDLESS
OF WHAT PEOPLE THINK OR WANT.
BUT BIG IS BEAUTIFUL.
WHAT WE HAVE TO FEAR
IS NOT SIZE BUT MONOPOLY.
WHAT'S HAPPENED
IN THE AGE OF GLOBALIZATION
IS THAT MULTINATIONALS
HAVE GOTTEN LESS POWERFUL
BECAUSE FREE TRADE HAS MEANT
THEY CAN NO LONGER BE IN CAHOOTS
WITH THE GOVERNMENT AND HAVE
TO BE EXPOSED TO COMPETITION.
TODAY, THE CONSUMERS CONTROL
THE CORPORATIONS.
AND IT'S THOSE HATED
MULTI-NATIONAL CORPORATIONS
AND SWEATSHOPS THAT ARE HELPING
VIETNAM TO BECOME RICH.
IN JUST 15 YEARS, THE
VIETNAMESE ECONOMY HAS DOUBLED
AND THE AMOUNT OF PEOPLE LIVING
IN ABSOLUTE POVERTY HAS HALVED.
IN FACT, POVERTY THRIVES
IN PRECISELY THOSE COUNTRIES
THAT FAIL TO
EMBRACE GLOBALIZATION,
LIKE MOST AFRICAN COUNTRIES.
NEXT, I AM GOING TO KENYA
TO SHOW YOU WHY.
KENYA. EAST AFRICA.
JUST 50 YEARS AGO,
TAIWAN WAS AS POOR AS KENYA,
BUT THE TAIWANESE
ARE NOW TWENTY TIMES RICHER
WHEREAS ONE IN THREE PEOPLE HERE
STILL LIVE IN ABSOLUTE POVERTY.
PEOPLE HERE ARE POOR
BECAUSE KENYA CLOSED ITS DOORS
TO GLOBALIZATION.
MORE THAN HALF OF THE KENYAN
POPULATION WORKS ON THE LAND.
MOST FARMERS ARE STILL POOR
BECAUSE THE KENYAN GOVERNMENT
HAS NEVER GIVEN THEM
PROPERTY RIGHTS.
WHEREAS IN TAIWAN,
GIVING PEOPLE THEIR OWN LAND
WAS THE FIRST STEP ON THE ROAD,
TO INDUSTRIALIZATION AND GROWTH.
HERE FARMERS LIKE SIMON WAMWAKE
CAN'T EVEN HOPE TO EXPAND.
SIMON IS NOT EVEN ALLOWED TO
BUILD ON HIS LAND AND, ANYWAY,
IT WOULD BE POINTLESS
TO MAKE THE INVESTMENT AS,
WITHOUT OWNERSHIP, HE WOULDN'T
BE ABLE TO REAP THE REWARDS.
SIMON: THIS LAND STILL BELONGS
TO THE GOVERNMENT.
I'M FARMING IT ONLY
FOR A SHORT TIME.
EVEN IF YOU ARE CULTIVATING
THE LAND, THE LAND STILL BELONGS
TO THE GOVERNMENT, AND SO WE DO
IT AS IF WE ARE MOVING, MOVING.
WE JUST FIGHT FOR SURVIVAL
FOR TODAY AND TOMORROW.
NARRATOR: SO YOU WILL NEVER GET
A PROPERTY RIGHT?
SIMON: YOU WILL NEVER GET
THE PROPERTY RIGHT, NEVER.
NARRATOR: HOW DO YOU THINK
AGRICULTURE WOULD CHANGE
IN KENYA IF ALL OF YOU
GOT PROPERTY RIGHTS?
IF WE WERE ALLOWED
TO DO SO, KENYA WILL BE
A VERY HIGH-EARNING,
VERY PROSPEROUS COUNTRY.
NARRATOR: BUT
KENYA IS NOT PROSPEROUS.
HAMPERED BY BUREAUCRACY AT HOME
AND EXPORT RESTRICTIONS ABROAD.
KIBERA IS A SHANTY TOWN
CLINGING TO THE EDGE
OF THE CAPITAL, NAIROBI.
HERE, NEARLY A MILLION PEOPLE
ARE CRAMMED TOGETHER
WITHOUT RUNNING WATER,
SANITATION OR ELECTRICITY.
THERE ARE PLENTY
OF ENTREPRENURES HERE,
BUT FOR ALL THEIR HARD WORK
THE PEOPLE HERE ARE POOR.
SO WHY CAN'T
THEIR BUSINESSES THRIVE?
YET AGAIN, IT'S ABOUT LAND.
NO ONE OWNS THEIR PLOT.
NARRATOR: WHAT DO YOU THINK
WOULD CHANGE IN YOUR LIFE
IF YOU HAD A PROPERTY RIGHT
TO THIS SHOP AND THIS LAND?
WOMAN: IF I CAN LEND CAPITAL,
ENOUGH CAPITAL,
TO START A BUSINESS LIKE
THE OTHER ONE, I CAN MAKE IT.
NARRATOR: COULD
YOU GET HELP FROM...?
YOU CAN'T GET HELP FROM
NOWHERE. IT WILL BE A PROBLEM.
NARRATOR: IF YOU
DON'T OWN YOUR LAND,
YOU CAN'T EXPAND
OR SECURE A LOAN.
ON TOP OF THAT, TRADERS HERE
HAVE TO BUY A LICENSE.
ACCORDING TO THE WORLD BANK,
IT TAKES 11 PROCEDURES,
68 DAYS, AND HALF
A YEAR'S INCOME TO GET ONE.
IT'S NO WONDER THAT
HALF OF ALL KENYANS
WORK ON THE BLACK MARKET.
WHAT THE PEOPLE HERE DEMONSTRATE
IS THAT KENYA CAN'T GROW.
GIVEN THE BARRIERS THEY
FACE, NONE OF THEM CAN BUILD
THEIR BUSINESSES,
SO CAPITALISM CAN'T TAKE ROOT.
WOMAN: IF YOU HAVE NO MONEY,
THE GOVERNMENT
WON'T GIVE YOU A LICENSE.
YOU HAVE TO GIVE THEM MONEY AND
THEN THEY GIVE YOU A LICENSE,
BUT THAT MONEY IS NEEDED
TO BUILD THINGS LIKE A ROOF
OVER MY HEAD AND OTHER THINGS.
EVERYTHING DEPENDS ON MONEY.
IF I OBTAINED A LICENSE, I
COULD BUILD, I COULD BUY BOXES.
DO YOU SEE THIS DUST?
IF I HAD BOXES I COULD
SELL FROM NOW 'TIL NIGHT.
MAN: YOU CAN'T GET MONEY TO
START A BUSINESS LIKE THIS
IF YOU HAVE NO MEANS.
IT'S HARD TO GET MACHINES
LIKE THIS IF YOU HAVE NO MONEY.
IF I HAD MONEY TO START
A BUSINESS,
I WOULD OPEN MY OWN BARBERSHOP.
NARRATOR: IS THE PROBLEM HERE
LACK OF ACCESS TO CLEAN WATER?
NO.
IS IT STARVATION?
IS IT LAZINESS?
DEFINITELY NOT.
NO, IT'S POVERTY DUE TO LACK OF
GROWTH, DUE TO LACK OF REFORM.
EVERYTHING ELSE IS
JUST A SYMPTOM OF THAT.
IN FACT, EVEN THE
BIGGEST HORRORS, FAMINE AND
WAR HAVE POLITICAL CAUSES.
NO DEMOCRACY HAS EVER
BEEN AFFLICTED BY FAMINE
AND NO TWO DEMOCRACIES HAVE
EVER MADE WAR ON EACH OTHER.
AFRICA HAS BEEN SUBJECTED
TO SOCIALISM,
GANGSTER RULE AND PROTECTIONISM.
AFRICA HAS NOT
BEEN TOO GLOBALIZED.
IT HAS BEEN TOO MARGINALIZED.
NARRATOR: OPPRESSIVE
AND CORRUPT POLITICIANS
HAVE SYSTEMATICALLY SHATTERED
THE KENYA'S POTENTIAL.
BUT THERE ARE SIGNS OF CHANGE.
IN DECEMBER, 2002,
A NEW PRESIDENT WAS ELECTED,
OUSTING THE NOTORIOUSLY
CORRUPT REGIME
OF PRESIDENT DANIEL ARAP MOI.
THE NEW GOVERNMENT
IS BREEDING NEW HOPE
AND THE MOOD IN THE COUNTRY
IS BUOYANT.
JUNE ARUNYA, A 21-YEAR-OLD
ECONOMICS STUDENT,
IS PASSIONATE
AND IDEALISTIC
ABOUT HER COUNTRY'S
POTENTIAL TO GROW.
THE KIND OF KENYA I'D LIKE TO
SEE IS WHERE PEOPLE'S IDEAS
COULD BE TURNED INTO REALITY,
WHERE IDEAS WOULD BE GIVEN
THE OPPORTUNITY TO COMPETE,
SO THAT ALL THE TALENT WE HAVE
DOESN'T GO TO THE GRAVE.
A KENYA WHERE ALL THE OTHER
IDEAS OUT THERE THAT EVERYBODY
HAS ACCESS TO
ARE ALLOWED HERE.
A KENYA WHERE
IF YOU'RE BILL GATES
AND WINDOWS IS IN YOUR MIND
YOU CAN BECOME A BILLIONAIRE.
NARRATOR:
THIS IS AN OUTDOOR MARKET
ON THE OUTSKIRTS OF NAIROBI
KNOWN AS THE JUA KALI, SWAHILI
FOR UNDER THE FIERCE SUN.
ALL KINDS
OF GOODS FROM POTS
AND PANS TO HUBCAPS,
TRUNKS AND TOYS ARE
CONJURED OUT OF SCRAP METAL.
PEOPLE HERE
ARE CLEARLY TALENTED
AND AS MOTIVATED
AND HARD-WORKING
AS THE TAIWANESE
OR VIETNAMESE
BUT WHAT MULTI-NATIONAL
WOULD WANT TO SET UP SHOP
AND HIRE THESE PEOPLE
IN SUCH A HOSTILE
BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT?
THESE BUSINESSES ARE DOOMED TO
REMAIN INFORMAL AND SMALL-SCALE.
FOR NOW JUNE'S DREAM FOR
KENYA REMAINS AN ELUSIVE UTOPIA.
BUT IT NEEDN'T BE LIKE THIS.
WHEN THE GOVERNMENT
RELAXED RESTRICTIONS
ON MOBILE PHONE INDUSTRY,
SALES SOARED AND NOW CHEAP
MOBILES HAVE REVOLUTIONIZED
THE LIVES OF THOUSANDS
OF KENYANS.
THE MOBILE PHONE INDUSTRY
IS BOOMING
AND MANY KENYANS
CAN'T AFFORD EXPENSIVE,
STATE-CONTROLLED LAND-LINES
NOW OWN MOBILES.
JUNE:
MY GRANDFATHER, WE COULD ONLY
VISIT HIM ONCE A YEAR BEFORE
BECAUSE HE LIVES VERY FAR
AWAY AND MY MOTHER HAD TO SAVE
THE
WHOLE YEAR TO BE ABLE TO FERRY
THE WHOLE FAMILY TO SEE HIM.
AND HE'S VERY SICKLY.
BUT SINCE THE COMING OF MOBILE
PHONES SHE COULD BUY A PHONE
VERY CHEAPLY, GIVE IT TO HIM AND
NOW WE CAN CALL HIM ANY TIME.
NARRATOR:
JUNE TOOK ME TO A VAST SECOND
HAND CLOTHES MARKET IN NAIROBI.
PEOPLE HERE SELL CHEAP CLOTHES
IMPORTED IN BULK FROM ABROAD.
LIKE THE MOBILE PHONE INDUSTRY,
ITS EXPOSURE TO GLOBALIZATION
HAS MADE THIS MARKET
A MASSIVE SUCCESS.
JUNE:
WE COULD OVERNIGHT NOT TELL
THE DIFFERENCE ON THE STREET
BETWEEN A RICH PERSON
AND POOR PERSON
BECAUSE IT WAS
SO OBVIOUS BEFORE.
WHEN I GREW UP, PEOPLE
HAD MOSTLY FOUR OUTFITS:
THEIR SUNDAY BEST
WHICH THEY WOULD WEAR TO CHURCH,
THEIR SCHOOL UNIFORM
AND THEN TWO OTHER OUTFITS
THAT THEY WOULD WEAR AT HOME.
BUT SINCE THE COMING
OF THESE CLOTHES, YOU KNOW,
I CAN CHANGE MY CLOTHES
AS MANY TIMES AS I WANT,
GET THEM IN
THE DIFFERENT COLORS I WANT.
NARRATOR: STEPHEN IS
TYPICAL OF A STALLHOLDER
WHO HAS PROFITED
FROM THIS BOOMING NEW MARKET.
STEPHEN: THE SECOND-HAND CLOTHES
BUSINESS HAS HELPED ME A LOT.
IF I HADN'T HAD THIS BUSINESS,
I WOULDN'T HAVE HAD
ANY OTHER WAY OF EARNING
BECAUSE I HAVE NO EDUCATION.
SO IT'S HELPED ME A
LOT TO HAVE A GOOD LIFE FOR ME
AND MY FAMILY
WITH OUR FOUR CHILDREN.
WE'VE BEEN ABLE
TO BUILD A FINE HOUSE
AND NOW I HAVE A LIFE
THAT SUITS ME.
IF IT WEREN'T FOR THIS,
I'D PROBABLY BE A LABORER.
NARRATOR:
A FEW YEARS AGO, THE GOVERNMENT
INTRODUCED A TAX ON THE CLOTHES
AND RECENTLY THEY HAVE
RAISED THAT TAX CONSIDERABLY.
SO IMPORT DUTIES ARE YET AGAIN
KEEPING GLOBALIZATION AT BAY
AND THREANING ONE
OF KENYA'S FEW SUCCESS STORIES.
HE SAID THAT
IF THIS INDUSTRY WAS CLOSED,
HE KNOWS FOR SURE THERE'LL BE
LOTS OF CHILDREN WALKING NAKED.
HE SAYS HE KNOWS MANY WOMEN
WHO HAVE UP TO TEN CHILDREN
AND THESE ARE THE ONLY
CLOTHES THEY'VE EVER WORN.
NARRATOR:
EVEN IF KENYA DID AWAY WITH
ALL ITS RESTRICTIONS AT HOME,
THERE REMAINS ANOTHER
VAST BARRIER STANDING
BETWEEN IT AND THE PROSPERITY
THAT GLOBALIZATION COULD BRING.
WEALTHY COUNTRIES HAVE IMPOSED
HIGH TARIFFS ON ALMOST ALL
THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS
KENYA COULD EXPORT TO THEM,
WITH THE EXCEPTION OF
SOME VEGETABLES AND FLOWERS.
IN THE CASE OF FLOWERS,
THE EUROPEAN UNION AGREED
TO KEEP TARIFFS ON KENYA'S
FLOWER EXPORTS LOW. THE RESULT?
KENYA HAS BECOME
THE LEADING EXPORTER
OF CUT FLOWERS TO EUROPE.
JANE: CURRENTLY WE ARE SELLING
TO THE EUROPEAN UNION MOSTLY.
THAT IS IN THE NETHERLANDS,
GERMANY, SWEDEN, SWITZERLAND
AND THE UK ALSO.
WE ALSO
SELL TO THE UNITED EMIGRATES
AND ALSO TO THE AMERICAS.
JANE IS THE EXPORT MANAGER HERE.
I ASKED HER WHAT WOULD HAPPEN
IF THE EUROPEAN UNION STOPPED
GIVING THE FLOWER INDUSTRY
SPECIALLY-LOW TARIFFS.
JANE: THAT MEANS THAT
THE FARMS WOULD ALL PERISH.
I MEAN IT'S A DISASTER
TO THE INDUSTRY.
BECAUSE RIGHT NOW THE MARGINS
WE ARE HAVING ARE VERY SMALL
AND WHATEVER WE ARE ENJOYING
RIGHT NOW IS BECAUSE OF THE DUTY
THAT HAS BEEN REDUCED FOR US.
THAT MEANS IF YOU PUT THE DUTY,
THAT THE FARMS WOULD CERTAINLY
NOT OPERATE,
THEY'LL ALL CLOSE DOWN
AND THE SOCIAL IMPACT
ON THAT IS TERRIBLE.
NARRATOR: THE EUROPEAN UNION
HAS REDUCED TARIFFS ON FLOWERS.
WHAT WOULD HAPPEN IF THEY
REDUCED AND ABOLISHED TARIFFS
FOR ALL OTHER GOODS
AND ALLOWED ALL OF THEM
INTO THE EUROPEAN MARKET?
THEN THE ECONOMY IN KENYA
WOULD DO SO WELL.
NARRATOR: BUT
KENYA ISN'T DOING WELL
DESPITE THESE ISOLATED
SUCCESS STORIES.
AND I BELIEVE THAT'S PARTLY
BECAUSE WHAT WE'RE CURRENTLY
DOING IS EVEN WORSE
THAN JUST TRYING TO KEEP
KENYAN AGRICULTURAL EXPORTS OUT.
THE EUROPEAN UNION PROTECTS
OUR FARMERS BY SUBSIDIZING FOOD
FOR EXPORT TO COUNTRIES
LIKE KENYA. THE RESULTS?
FORMERLY THRIVING
COMMERCIAL FARMS,
LIKE PETER MWANGI'S,
ARE SUFFERING.
IN FACT, OVER THE LAST
FEW YEARS, PETER HAS HAD TO STOP
CULTIVATING LARGE PARTS
OF HIS LAND.
SOME PEOPLE IN EUROPE
THINK THEY ARE ACTUALLY HELPING
A COUNTRY LIKE KENYA WHEN THE
TAXPAYERS ARE SUBSIDIZING WHEAT
AND SO ON AND DUMPING IT HERE.
WHAT WOULD YOU SAY TO THEM?
PETER: NO THEY
ARE NOT HELPING KENYA
BECAUSE THEY BRING WHEAT
WHEN WE DON'T NEED IT.
THEY SHOULD BRING
WHEN WE ASK THEM TO BRING;
WHEN WE HAVE DROUGHT.
MAYBE THEY COULD TAKE IT TO A
COUNTRY LIKE ETHIOPIA OR SOMALIA
WHERE THEY DON'T GROW WHEAT,
BUT WHEN WE NEED IT,
AT THE RIGHT TIME,
THEY CAN BRING.
BUT NOT WHEN WE ARE HARVESTING
OR WHEN WE HAVE A BUMPER CROP.
CAN YOU IMAGINE?
I'M HAVING A CROP,
SOMEONE BRINGS ANOTHER CROP
FROM OUTSIDE THE COUNTRY,
DUMPS IT HERE,
AND I WANT TO HARVEST.
MY WHEAT IS NOT BOUGHT.
IT'S NOT FAIR AT ALL.
NARRATOR: SO THE EU SUBSIDIZES
OUR FOOD EXPORTS
AND HARD-WORKING FARMERS
LIKE PETER SUFFER.
AND THEN, WHEN THERE'S
A FOOD SHORTAGE A FEW YEARS
DOWN THE LINE WE SEND
MORE WHEAT - AS FOOD AID.
KENYANS ARE GOOD AT FARMING,
BOTH CROPS AND LIVESTOCK.
THEY DON'T NEED AID.
THEY NEED THE CHANCE TO COMPETE.
WHEN RICH COUNTRIES DROP
THEIR PROTECTIONISM,
PROFITS CAN SOAR.
YET THE EU
IS OFTEN UNWILLING
TO OPEN ITS DOORS
TO FOREIGN COMPETITION.
WITH TARIFFS,
WE KEEP THEIR GOODS OUT.
WITH SUBSIDIES WE DESTROY
THEIR MARKETS HERE.
WE SPEND HALF OF THE ENTIRE
EU BUDGET ON OUR FARMERS,
THE COMMON
AGRICULTURAL POLICY.
NARRATOR: WE SPEND
SO MUCH ON FARMING THAT
EACH OF OUR 20 MILLION COWS
COULD FLY ROUND THE
WORLD ONCE EVERY YEAR.
HOW CAN KENYAN DAIRY
OR BEEF FARMERS POSSIBLY
COMPETE WITH THAT?
BUT IF WE ALLOWED
KENYA TO EXPORT THEM
AND IF KENYA DID AWAY
WITH ITS RESTRICTIONS
AND RED TAPE,
KENYA COULD SERIOUSLY
COMPETE WITH US.
NARRATOR: IT'S NOT THAT
WE IN THE WEST ARE TRYING
TO TRICK POOR COUNTRIES
INTO GLOBAL CAPITALISM.
THE PROBLEM IS WE ARE
SHUTTING THEM OUT FROM IT.
THE TWO AREAS WHERE
THE POOREST COUNTRIES
COULD COMPETE
MOST STRONGLY
AND SO BECOME RICH ARE
FARMING AND TEXTILES.
BUT THESE ARE PRECISELY
THE GOODS IN WHICH RICH
COUNTRIES REFUSE
TO TRADE FREELY.
THE EUROPEAN UNION, FOR
EXAMPLE, HAS 10,794 TARIFFS,
QUOTAS AND SUBSIDIES
TO PROTECT OUR FARMERS
AND MANUFACTURERS.
IMAGINE THE AMOUNT
OF BUREAUCRACY DEALING
WITH ALL THAT PAPERWORK.
ONCE UPON A TIME,
WE ESCAPED POVERTY
BECAUSE WE GLOBALIZED.
WE PRODUCED
AND TRADED FREELY.
NOW THAT WE ARE RICH,
WE ARE WITHHOLDING
THOSE SAME OPPORTUNITIES
FROM POOR COUNTRIES.
IF WE DROPPED OUR
SUBSIDIES AND TARIFFS
WE COULD MASSIVELY REDUCE
POVERTY IN AFRICA.
THE UNITED NATIONS
HAS CALCULATED
THAT IF WE DID THIS,
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
COULD MAKE AS MUCH
AS £450 BILLION A YEAR
FROM EXPORTS.
THAT'S 14 TIMES MORE THAN
THEY RECEIVE IN AID TODAY.
OUR WORLD ISN'T
AT ALL TOO GLOBALIZED.
IN FACT IT HAS FAR TOO
LITTLE GLOBALIZATION.
WHEREVER THE DOORS
HAVE BEEN OPENED,
WE'VE SEEN
AMAZING RESULTS.
THEREFORE ONE OF THE WORST
ENEMIES OF THE POOR TODAY
IS THE ANTI-GLOBALIZATION
MOVEMENT.
THEY ARE ENCOURAGING THE EU
AND THE US TO HAVE MORE,
NOT LESS RESTRICTIONS.
THESE PEOPLE ARE
WRONG AND DANGEROUS.
AT THE PRESENT TIME, THE
WORLD'S WEALTHIEST COUNTRIES
ARE TRYING TO AGREE
TO REDUCE PROTECTIONISM.
IF THIS HAPPENS,
IT WILL MAKE IT MUCH
EASIER FOR POOR COUNTRIES
TO TRADE THEIR WAY
TO PROSPERITY.
BUT THE ANTI-GLOBALIZATION
PROTESTERS,
HOWEVER WELL-INTENTIONED,
HAVE GIVEN OUR GOVERNMENTS
AN EXCUSE TO BACK AWAY
FROM THESE REFORMS.
SO TODAY,
WE ALL FACE A CHOICE:
DO WE LOBBY OUR GOVERNMENTS
AGAINST GLOBALIZATION
OR DO WE CAMPAIGN AGAINST
THE BARRIERS TO GLOBALIZATION
THAT STILL EXIST?
WORLD POVERTY
IS NOT INEVITABLE.
GLOBAL CAPITALISM
CAN END THAT POVERTY.
IT HAS DONE SO WHEREVER
IT'S BEEN GIVEN A CHANCE,
IN EUROPE,
NORTH AMERICA, EAST ASIA.
THE ISSUE AT STAKE IN
THE GLOBALIZATION DEBATE IS
WHETHER THE WORLD'S
EXCLUDED ARE GOING
TO GET THAT SAME CHANCE.